# Results

## Building a family-wide model of the common gamma chain cytokine receptors and fitting data to it

![**A family-wide model of the common gamma chain cytokine receptors.** A) Cartoon of all receptor-ligand complexes and binding events. Ligands are circles and complexes are boxes. Active species are outlined in red. Rate constants obtained from literature are denoted by diamonds; those solved through detailed balance are denoted by octagons and those solved through fitting are denoted by octagons with double outline. Rate constants that were measured as proportional to other rates are denoted by triangles. B) Model prediction vs. experimental results for maximal pSTAT5 activation in YT-1 cells under various concentrations of ligand stimulation for 500 minutes. Experimental measurements are denoted by triangles for IL2Ra- cells and circles for IL2Ra+ cells. The 95% confidence intervals of model predictions are denoted by shaded regions. C-D) Model prediction vs. experimental results for percent of initial IL2Rb on the cell surface for various ligand stimulation concentrations and cell types. Measurements were collected over the course of 90 minutes.Experimental measurements are denoted by triangles for IL2Ra- cells and circles for IL2Ra+ cells. The 95% confidence intervals of model predictions are denoted by shaded regions. E-F) XXXX. G-H) Posterior distribution for trafficking rate parameters and receptor expression rates. Trafficking rates have units of 1/min and receptor expression rates have units of number / cell * minute; both are scaled by log10 for plotting purposes. I) Posterior distributions for IL2's and IL15's analogous reaction rates. Values have units of 1/min and are scaled by log10 for plotting purposes. Rates constants measured in literature are represented by dots. (./Figures/figure1.svg){#fig:modelConstruct}

To generate distributions for our unknown rate parameters, we fit our reaction model to experimental data by using MCMC sampling [@ring_mechanistic_2012]. We then plugged in the rate parameter distributions into our model in order to generate predictions for the experimental data. The model predictions were overlayed onto the experimental data to show agreement ([@Fig:modelConstruct]B-D). Predictions for percent of maximal pSTAT5 activation matched the experimental data with .... (some measurement of model accuracy here) ([@Fig:modelConstruct]B).

Our model predictions for the percent of initial IL2Rb on the cell surface fit the experimental data most closely at high ligand stimulation concentrations (500 nM) and captured the trend of surface IL2Rb depletion at low ligand stimulation concentrations (1 nM) ([@Fig:modelConstruct]C-D). The less-than-optimal fit in the 1 nM cases can be attributed to the fluctuating nature of its experimental data, as there were certain time intervals when the amount of surface IL2Rb increased according to our measurements. Such fluctuation could not be captured by our reactiong model as it does not incorporate high degree polynomials.

Our posterior distributions showed that analogous reverse reaction rates were consistently smaller for rates involving IL15 compared to those involving IL2 ([@Fig:modelConstruct]I). Analogous rates were defined as having the same movement of ligand, alpha chain, beta chain and gamma chain as one complex dissociation with another. This discrepancy in analogous rates indicates that complexes containing IL15 exhibit tighter binding behavior as it takes longer for receptors to dissociate from one another than in IL2 complexes. Furthermore, since the IL2 and IL15 families have IL2Rb and gamma chain in common, the discrepancy in analogous rates speaks to the differences between the alpha chains and ligands in these two families ([@Fig:modelConstruct]A).
