# Results

## Trafficking is necessary to capture IL-2 and IL-15 dose response and the effect of IL-2Rα expression

![**A family-wide model of the common gamma chain cytokine receptors.** Experimental measurements are denoted by triangles for IL-2Rα- cells and circles for IL-2Rα+ cells. The 25-75% confidence intervals of model predictions are shaded dark and the 10-90% confidence intervals are shaded light. A) Cartoon of all receptor-ligand complexes and binding events. Ligands are circles and complexes are boxes. Active species are outlined in red. Rate constants obtained from literature are denoted by diamonds; those solved through detailed balance are denoted by octagons and those solved through fitting are denoted by octagons with double outline. Rate constants that were measured as proportional to other rates are denoted by triangles.
B) Model prediction vs. experimental results for maximal pSTAT5 activation in YT-1 cells under various concentrations of ligand stimulation for 500 min.
C-E) Model prediction vs. experimental results for percent of initial IL-2Rβ (C, D) and γ~c~ (E) on the cell surface for various ligand stimulation concentrations and cell types. IL-2Rβ measurements were collected over the course of 90 min and γ~c~ measurements were collected for 240 min.
F-H) Posterior distributions from fitting to data. Trafficking rates (F) have units of $\mathrm{min^{-1}}$, receptor expression rates (G) have units of $\mathrm{\# * cell^{-1} * min^{-1}}$, $C_{5}$ has units of $\mathrm{\# * cell^{-1}}$, $k_{fwd}$ has units of $\mathrm{cell * \#^{-1} * min^{-1}}$, and $f_{sort}$ is unitless; Trafficking and receptor expression rates are scaled by log~10~ while $C_{5}$ and $k_{fwd}$ are normalized from 0-1.
I) Posterior distributions for IL-2's and IL-15's analogous reaction rates. All rates have units of $\mathrm{min^{-1}}$ and are scaled by log~10~ for plotting purposes. Rates constants measured in literature are represented by dots.](./Figures/figure1.svg){#fig:modelConstruct}

To model how individual binding events give rise to cell response, we built a reaction model representing the relevant binding and regulatory mechanisms within the common γ~c~ cytokine family ([@Fig:modelConstruct]A). As endocytic trafficking is a critical mechanism of regulatory feedback for surface receptors and their ligands[@Fallon2000; @Fallon10032000; @Basquin1099], we extended earlier efforts by including trafficking of receptors and their complexes [@ring_mechanistic_2012; @Feinerman437]. We assumed that species trafficked into a distinct endocytic compartment continue to produce STAT5 signaling and participate in binding events. Rate parameters for IL-2 and IL-15 binding events were parameterized by direct experimental measurement (diamond), soluble experimental measurement (triangle), detailed balance (octagon), or estimated by model fitting (double outlined octagon) to existing experimental measurements ([@Fig:modelConstruct]B-D, Table 1).

The model was fit to pSTAT5, surface IL-2Rβ, and surface γ~c~ measurements; the posterior parameter distributions taken from these fits ([@Fig:modelConstruct]F-I) were plugged back into our model and accurately predict the data ([@Fig:modelConstruct]B-E) [@ring_mechanistic_2012; mitra_interleukin-2_2015]. To evaluate the effect of including trafficking, we fit a no-trafficking version of the model to only the pSTAT5 measurements; this fit failed to explain IL-2 stimulation in IL-2Rα- cells the posterior parameter distributions were more broadly defined than in the trafficking model ([@Fig:supp1]). Both models converged according to the Geweke criterion metric ([@Fig:supp2]) [@Geweke92]. Additionally, IL-2·IL-2Rα complexes had a higher affinity for IL-2Rβ and γ~c~ than their IL-15·IL-15Rα counterparts in the trafficking model ($k_{4} < k_{16}$ and $k_{11} < k_{23}$); however, the opposite was true for IL-2Rβ ($k_{4} > k_{16}$) and the affinities were equal for γ~c~ ($k_{11} = k_{23}$) in the no-trafficking model ([@Fig:modelConstruct]F, [@Fig:supp1]B). Depletion of surface IL-2Rβ and γ~c~ occurs when YT-1 cells were given ligand since both receptors combine to form active complexes that internalize more rapidly than other receptor complexes. Consistent with surface receptor depletion driven through rapid active complex internalization, depletion occurred faster at higher cytokine doses ([@Fig:modelConstruct]C-D). Correspondingly, the rate of active complex internalization ($k_{endo,a}$) was ~10x greater than that for inactive species ($k_{endo}$) ([@Fig:modelConstruct]G). In addition to capturing individual dose responses, the model accurately represented the effect of changes in IL-2Rα expression. The experimental pSTAT5 and surface IL-2Rβ data for both IL2-Rα-negative and -expressing YT-1 cells was fit by setting the IL-2Rα expression rate to 0 in the former case and letting the rate vary by the fit parameter in the latter case.

Our model produced specific predictions about the abundance of each receptor within YT-1 cells ([@Fig:modelConstruct]F). To validate these, we experimentally quantified the absolute receptor abundance for YT-1 cells. [add sentence about how accurate this winds up being].

Since IL-2 and IL-15 lead to formation of analogous active complexes, with IL-2Rβ, γ~c~, and a signaling-deficient high-affinity receptor (IL-2Rα/IL-15Rα), comparing their reaction rates gave insight into how IL-2 and IL-15 differ from one another ([@Fig:modelConstruct]F). The two ligands had nearly the same affinity for binding directly to IL-2Rβ; however, IL-15 had a higher affinity for its α-chain than IL-2 did for its α-chain (neither ligand binds directly to γ~c~). Consequently, IL-15’s complexes were inferred to more readily dimerize with a free α-chain than IL-2’s complexes ($k_{8} > k_{20}$, $k_{12} > k_{24}$). Similarly, IL-15 complexes had a slightly higher affinity for capturing IL-2Rβ and γ~c~ than their IL-2 counterparts ($k_{9} < k_{21}$, $k_{10} < k_{22}$, $k_{11} < k_{23}$). The affinities of γ~c~ binding to ligand·IL-2Rβ and ligand·α-chain complexes were comparable between IL-2 and IL-15 ($k_{4} = k_{16}$, $k_{5} = k_{17}$). The data is also consistent with literature in that both ligands have higher affinity for IL-2Rβ when they are bound to their α-chain ($k_{2}, k_{14} > k_{11}, k_{23}$) [@spangler_antibodies_2015].


## Family model correctly captures both single and combination IL-4/IL-7 dose response

![**A reaction model captures cytokine-cytokine interactions.** A) Schematic of IL-4 and IL-7 receptor complexes competing for γ~c~ and generating distinct pSTAT signals. B-C) Fitting model to experimental data. Experimental measurements are denoted by triangles. Shaded areas represents 25-75% and 10-90% confidence intervals of model predictions. pSTAT5 was measured for IL-7 experiments and pSTAT6 was measured for IL-4 experiments. B) Single-cytokine pSTAT dose-response measurements for 10 min of exposure to IL-4 and IL-7. C) Percent inhibition of the second cytokine’s pSTAT response in a dual-cytokine dose-response experiment. Human PBMCs were pretreated with various concentrations of one cytokine for 10 min before being stimulated with a fixed concentration (50 pg/mL IL-7 or 100 pg/mL IL-4) of the other cytokine for an additional 10 min. D) Model predictions for percent inhibition of the second cytokine’s pSTAT response in a dual-cytokine dose-response experiment with the assumption that active species are endocytosed at the same rate as inactive species ($k_{endo,a} = 0$). E) Model predictions for percent of γ~c~ on the human PBMC surface when exposed to 100 pg/mL of either IL-7 or IL-4 for 100 min. F) Violin plot of K~a~ values obtained via posterior distributions of $\frac{k_{fwd}}{k_{rev}}$ for $k_{rev}$ parameters corresponding to different complexes competing for the common γ~c~ ([@Fig:modelConstruct]A). K~a~ values had units of $\mathrm{nM^{-1}}$ and are scaled by log~10~. G-I) Posterior distributions from fitting to data. Trafficking rates (G) have units of $\mathrm{min^{-1}}$, receptor expression rates (H) have units of $\mathrm{\# * cell^{-1} * min^{-1}}$, $C_{5}$ and $C_{6}$ have units of $\mathrm{\# * cell^{-1}}$, $k_{fwd}$ has units of $\mathrm{cell * \#^{-1} * min^{-1}}$, and $f_{sort}$ is unitless; Trafficking and receptor expression rates are scaled by log~10~ while $C_{5}$, $C_{6}$, and $k_{fwd}$ are normalized from 0-1. ](./Figures/figure2.svg){#fig:cytokInt}

While the active complexes of IL-2 and IL-15 involve the same signaling-competent receptors, preventing the activity contributions of each cytokine from being distinguished from one another, IL-4 and IL-7 activity can be distinguished when both cytokines are co-administered to cells since IL-4 and IL-7 distinctly produce pSTAT6 and pSTAT5 signaling, respectively [@LEONARD2019832]. Using this phenomenon we explored cross-inhibition data wherein IL-4 and IL-7 doses were administered to human PBMCs both individually and together [@Gonnordeaal1253].

Unlike our data for IL-2 and IL-15 in YT-1 cells, the data for IL-4 and IL-7 in human PBMCs was accompanied by surface abundance measurements of IL-4Rα, IL-7Rα, and γ~c~. We used a steady state assumption in the absence of autocrine ligand to solve for  receptor expression rates. Our model fit both single and dual cytokine dose-response data sets with high accuracy ([@Fig:cytokInt]B-C). The fitting process identifiably constrained reaction rates, trafficking parameters, and pSTAT scaling constants ([@Fig:cytokInt]F-I). Despite fixed initial surface abundance, the receptor expression rates still formed distributions since they are dependent on trafficking parameters ([@Fig:cytokInt]G-H). Fitting to this data converged according to the Geweke criterion metric ([@Fig:supp2]) [@Geweke92].

The experimental data and model predictions revealed that IL-7 inhibited IL-4 activity more than IL-4 inhibited IL-7 activity ([@Fig:cytokInt]C). Such inhibitory behavior was explained by the competition of ligand + α-chain complexes for the common γ~c~. The K~d~ of this dimerization process for IL-7 ($k_{27}$) was smaller than the K~d~ for IL-4 ($k_{33}$), indicating that there was tighter dimerization of IL-7·IL-7Rα to γ~c~ than there was dimerization of IL-4·IL-4Rα to γ~c~ ([@Fig:cytokInt]F). The competition for γ~c~ was determined to play a larger role in signaling inhibition than receptor internalization since our model predicted that the same inhibitory relationships hold when active complexes internalize at the same rate as other species ([@Fig:cytokInt]D) and the majority of γ~c~ remained on the cell surface after ligand stimulation ([@Fig:cytokInt]E).

## Tensor Factorization Maps Response-Space of the Gamma Chain Family
Upon fitting the model to experimental measurements and obtaining the unknown parameters, we ran simulations on 13 cell types and monitored the interleukin activity with time. This presented a three-dimensional (time, cell type, ligand) tensor which we then decomposed with non-negative CP decomposition (Fig. 3A). Cell types were defined by the quantity of each receptor subspecies on their surfaces. We therefore experimentally quantified receptor levels on 13 cell types for IL-2Rα,  IL-2Rβ, γ~c~, and IL-15Rα (Fig. 3B). In our simulations, each cell was treated with a single interleukin over a range of concentrations ($10^{-2}$ to $10$ nM). This allowed us to build a tensor dataset for the following ligands: wild type IL-2, mutant IL-2, and wild type IL-15. The mutant IL-2 ligand was known to have a 10x enriched affinity for IL-2Rα compared to wild type IL-2 ($10 * k_{1,mut} = k_{1,wt}$). After constructing the tensor with these simulations, we iteratively decomposed the tensor while varying the number of components to determine the minimum number of components needed to obtain a percent explained variance ($\mathrm{R^{2}X}$) above 90%. The $\mathrm{R^{2}X}$ value increased as we increased the number of components and we reached the 90% threshold with three components since a three component decomposition had a $\mathrm{R^{2}X}$ of 93.1% (Fig. 3C). However, we decomposed our tensor to four components for visualization purposes. Note that four components will present overlapping information along the factorization matrices as the R2X reached 95%. To show the relationships among the three dimensions of the tensor, the component values of each dimension were plotted against each other, and the dimensions were placed side by side. The tensor’s first dimension was time, second was cell type, and third was ligands. For component 1 of the decomposition, IL-15 was most pronounced with the other ligands essentially at zero (Fig. 3F). High concentrations of IL-15 elicited a stronger activity response in naive and memory cytotoxic T cells since they all had a high component 1 score (Fig. 3E). This result aligns well with previous findings that suggest IL-15 induced proliferation for these cells and increased their turnover in vivo [@Berard5018]. Moreover, NKT also scored high on component, corresponding to high IL-15 concentrations. This relationship does not come as a surprise given that IL-15 is knows to regulate NKT maturation and survival [@Gordy6335]. These cells were also characterized by lower IL-15Rα surface receptor levels (Fig. 3B). Similarly, as IL-15’s concentration increased, its weight influence was more evident on cells higher along component one (Fig. 3E) that had higher IL-15Rα surface receptor levels (Fig. 3B). IL-15’s activity increased to a maximum during the first 25 minutes of a 4-hour simulation experiment, and then decreased to plateau at 50 minutes (Fig. 3D). Though redundant, component three also emphasized IL-15 activity, and the cell alignment and temporal behavior was similar to that of component two (Figs. 3D, G, H). 

Both the wild type and mutant IL-2 were most heavily weighted along the second component of the tensor decomposition (Fig. 3F). Cells that were more responsive to higher IL-2 doses had higher values along component two (Fig. 3E) as well as higher surface IL-2Rα levels (Fig. 3B). For example, T regulatory (including memory and naive), NK, and T helper cells all scored high along component two. This directly affirms previous literature suggesting that regulatory T cells are highly responsive to IL-2 induced activity [@chinen2016]. Furthermore, IL-2 has been shown to activate T helper cells as well as induce a positive feedback loop for the IL-2 signaling pathway [Busse3058]. In addition, high affinity mutant IL-2 have been previously shown to potently stimulate T cell growth [@Rao]. On the lower end, cells with lower IL-2Rα receptor counts exhibited lower activity such as naive and memory cytotoxic T cells (Fig. 3E). These results confirm previous understanding about Naive T cell’s relative insensitivity to IL-2 due to their low surface IL-2Rβ and γ~c~receptor levels [@Levin2012]. For component two, an oscillatory activity response was observed the first 25 minutes of the experiment, but then continued to decrease afterwards (Fig. 3D). The mutant version of the IL-2 diverged from the wild type behavior on component four. On the ligand decomposition plot, the mutant IL-2 had a much higher score along this component than wild type IL-2 (Fig 3H). The cells that corresponded to it include T regulatory cells along with memory and naive T regulatory cells (Fig. 3G), which were all characterized by levels of IL-2Rα and γ~c~ receptors that were around 20 times higher than IL-15Rα and IL-2Rβ (Fig. 3B). The temporal behavior for this mutant IL-2 along component four reached a maximum activity around 25 minutes after which it decreased slowly (Fig. 3D). This divergence from the wild type IL-2 allows for comparison on how it targets cell populations differently. Other tensor decomposition methods can also be applied to this tensor. For example, we performed a non-negative Tucker decomposition and showed similar plots in Figure S4.

TODO: Add reference for IL2-Ra-enriched IL-2 response
TODO: Add [@Smitheaan4931] for IL2Rb helper vs cytotoxic differences

## Tensor Factorization Shows Experimental Results
Given that this generated tensor was obtained through running simulations, we showed that the decomposition techniques can also be applied to experimental measurements. We collected ligand activity data for cells treated with either wild type IL-2 or IL-15 in a similar setup and constructed a tensor. Non-negative CP decomposition was performed on this experimental tensor, and similar cell, time, and ligand decomposition plots are shown in Figure S5.
