## Constructing a Family-Wide Model of the Common Gamma Chain Cytokine Receptors


![**A family-wide model of the common gamma chain cytokine receptors.** A) Cartoon of all receptor-ligand complexes and binding events. Ligands are circles and complexes are boxes. Active species are outlined in red. Rate constants obtained from literature are denoted by diamonds; those solved through detailed balance are denoted by octagons and those solved through fitting are denoted by octagons with double outline. Rate constants that were measured as proportional to other rates are denoted by triangles.
B) Model prediction vs. experimental results for maximal pSTAT5 activation in YT-1 cells under various concentrations of ligand stimulation for 500 minutes. Experimental measurements are denoted by triangles for IL-2Rα- cells and circles for IL-2Rα+ cells. The 95% confidence intervals of model predictions are denoted by shaded regions.
C-D) Model prediction vs. experimental results for percent of initial IL-2Rβ on the cell surface for various ligand stimulation concentrations and cell types. Measurements were collected over the course of 90 minutes.Experimental measurements are denoted by triangles for IL-2Rα- cells and circles for IL-2Rα+ cells. The 95% confidence intervals of model predictions are denoted by shaded regions.
E-F) XXXX.
G-H) Posterior distribution for trafficking rate parameters and receptor expression rates. Trafficking rates have units of 1/min and receptor expression rates have units of number / cell * minute; both are scaled by log10 for plotting purposes.
I) Posterior distributions for IL-2's and IL-15's analogous reaction rates. Values have units of 1/min and are scaled by log10 for plotting purposes. Rates constants measured in literature are represented by dots.](./Figures/figure1.svg){#fig:modelConstruct}

To begin to map the relationship between cytokine interaction and activation of the common γ~c~ cytokine family, we assembled a reaction model for the family ([@Fig:modelConstruct]A). Each cytokine binds to one or two private receptors, along with the common γ~c~ receptor. As γ~c~ binding is has universally been observed to be weaker than binding to the private recptor members, we assumed binding to a private receptor occurs prior to γ~c~ interaction. IL-2 and IL-15, both cytokines with two private receptors, share the private receptor IL-2Rβ, but also bind to private, signaling-incompetent receptors IL-2Rα and IL-15Rα, respectively. To correlate binding state and activation of the receptors, we assumed receptor-ligand complexes that harbor γ~c~ complexed to a signaling-competent private receptor are active.

To parameterize the remaining unknown parameters of our model, we fit our model to previous measurements of IL-2- and IL-15-induced STAT5 activation and IL-2Rβ internalization [@ring_mechanistic_2012]  (FIGURE CITE). 
