## Model Accurately Captures Cell Type-Specific Response to IL-2 Muteins

![**Model and tensor factorization predicts and decodes cell type-specific responses to IL-2 muteins.** A) IL-2Rα and IL-2Rβ/γ~c~ dissociation constants for our panel including wild-type IL-2 and IL-2 muteins. B-C) Predicted and measured T~reg~ activation specificity compared to NK (B) and T helper (C) cells. D) Partial derivatives of T~reg~ activation specificity compared to NK and T helper cells with respect to each surface and endosomal reverse binding rate constant. E) T~reg~ activation specificity with respect to NK and T helper cells as a function of IL-2Rβ/γ~c~ binding affinity for ligands with wild type and reduced IL-2Rα affinity. Specificity values are shown for cells exposed to a cytokine concentration of 38 pM. F) Experimentally measured and model-predicted EC~50~s of dose responses across IL-2 muteins and all 10 cell types. EC~50~s are shown for 1 hr time point. G-J) Tensor factorization of experimentally measured cellular activation values for wild-type IL-2/15, and IL-2 muteins. Component values versus ligand (G), cell type (H), time (I), and cytokine concentration (J). ](./Manuscript/Figures/figure6.svg){#fig:mutFac}

In order to further evaluate our model, we experimentally measured PBMC response to several IL-2 muteins and Fc-bound IL-2 monomers. Muteins were created by introducing targeted point mutations to IL-2 domains known to be instrumental in determining the binding affinity of the cytokine to both IL-2Rα and IL-2Rβ/γ~c~. In clinical applications, cytokines are often conjugated to antibodies in order to increase the longevity of cytokine-based drugs in the body. Conjugating these antibodies to the N or C-terminus of the cytokine has differing effects on the cytokine's binding affinities. Therefore, Fc conjugation can have either complementary or contradictory effects on mutation-mediated changes in receptor affinity, and affinity should be assessed in the clinical format. We quantified the effect of these mutations and conjugations on IL-2Rα and IL-2Rβ/γ~c~ receptor binding affinities and found that conjugation of Fc domains to the N-terminus selectively lowered IL-2Rβ/γ~c~ affinity, while conjugation to the C-terminus selectively lowered IL-2Rα affinity ([@fig:mutFac]A). Using these altered affinities, we were able to accurately predict cell type-specific activation levels when PBMC cells were exposed to these modified ligands ([@fig:supp6]).

We sought to identify strategies for selectively targeting T~regs~. In order to quantify the effectiveness of these modified and wild-type cytokines in selectively activating immunosuppressive T~reg~ cells, we defined formulated specificity functions. These functions were defined as pSTAT5 activity of T~reg~s divided by pSTAT5 activity of T-helper cells or NK cells. The specificity of T~reg~ activation with respect to NK and T-helper cells was experimentally determined and predicted by our model to be largest at low concentrations of IL-2, but was not found to have a significant relationship with IL-15 concentration ([@fig:mutFac]B/C). Because high T~reg~ specificity is desirable for several clinical applications of cytokine-based drugs, we also quantified the partial derivatives of our specificity functions with respect to both surface and endosomal binding constants, and found that increasing IL-2Rα affinity while decreasing IL-2Rβ/γ~c~ affinity on the cells surface would most drastically increase the cytokine's T~reg~ activation specificity ([@fig:mutFac]D). Changes in endosomal binding rates have been shown to have important effects on both cytokine half-life and potency, an effect which is again suggested here, as specificity was more sensitive to changes in endosomal IL-2Rα affinity [@Sarkar05082002]. Furthermore, our model predicts that ligands with reduced IL-2Rα affinity had a decreased ability to specifically activate T~reg~s with respect to NK and T-Helper cells over any degree of IL-2Rβ/γ~c~ affinity reduction ([@fig:mutFac]E). Our model was also able to accurately gauge the effect that changes in ligand-receptor binding affinities had on their respective EC~50~s ([@fig:mutFac]F). Ligands with decreased IL-2Rα affinity had increased EC~50~s for T~reg~ varieties, and ligands with decreased IL-2Rβ/γ~c~ affinities had larger EC~50~s for T-Helper cells, in accordance with our previous findings.

As before, understanding the effect of modifying a cytokine's binding affinities on cellular response is complicated by the variety of responding cells, differences in cytokine concentration, and time. In order to visualize our results, as in figure 3, we performed tensor factorization on a tensor containing the experimentally determined pSTAT5 levels of PBMC cells exposed to both wild-type and modified IL-2 ligands ([@Fig:mutFac]G-J). Using a tensor factorization with two components explained roughly 80% of the variance in the new combined data tensor. Among the ligands, wild-type IL-2/15 and wild-type IL-2 conjugated to an Fc domain at it's N-terminus are most correlated to T~reg~s via their shared correlation with component 2 ([@Fig:mutFac]G-J). This suggests that cytokines conjugated to domains at their N-terminus are more strongly suited to induce selective T~reg~ activation than those conjugated at their C-terminus, which is likely due to these conjugation types' opposing effects on the cytokine's IL-2Rα affinity. In total, our results demonstrate our model's ability to dynamically predict immune cell response to mutated or modified cytokines, as well as its ability to help identify new strategies for engineering signaling molecules with increased cellular activation specificity.
