# Discussion

<!-- Focus on paper results (need traficking to fit model, differential responsiveness between ligands..).-->

Here, we built a mass-action kinetic binding model for the common γ~c~ receptor family, and used factorization methods to explore its cell type-dependent behavior. This approach provided insights into its high-dimensional regulation. Our binding-reaction model combined the structure of ligand interaction with endosomal trafficking, both of which were critical for accurately modeling response ([@Fig:modelConstruct]; Fig. S1). After fitting our model to previously published cytokine response data, we were able to predict IL-2 and -15 response across a wide panel of PBMC-derived cell types ([@Fig:expData], Fig. S5). Mass-action models can help to explain counter-intuitive features of ligand response and identify specific strategies for optimizing therapeutically-desired properties [@Haugh2004; @MEYER201525]. In the case of the γ~c~ receptor cytokines, a therapeutic goal has been to specifically modulate subpopulations of cells based on their unique receptor expression profiles [@Levin2012; @BentebibelCD; @Bell_2015; @Peterson_2018]. To visualize these possibilities, we employed tensor factorization to map the signaling response space. This map provided a clearer picture of differential responsiveness between ligands, with selective and increased activation for certain cells and ligands ([@Fig:expFac]; [@fig:mutFac]). For example, we could clearly identify the selectivity of T helper cells for IL-7, and low concentrations of IL-2 for T~reg~s ([@Fig:tfac]).

<!-- How this helped cytokine engineering. -->

The model described here serves as an effective tool for cell type-selective rational cytokine design. In addition to the natural ligands, many cytokine muteins have been designed with altered binding affinities to specific receptors [@Berndt1994; @Collins7709]. Our model serves as a computational tool for comparing these muteins as immunotherapeutic drugs that selectively activate certain cell populations. For example, our model helped to identify that high IL-2Rα affinity is essential to preserve T~reg~ specificity, regardless of the affinity toward IL-2Rβ/γ~c~ ([@Fig:mutFac]). Fc conjugation orientation can significantly influence receptor affinity (including reducing IL-2Rα affinity), and so this step of drug design needs to be incorporated into ligand optimization ([@Fig:mutFac]E). Incorporating trafficking with the binding events of the cytokines allowed us to distinguish surface and endosomal binding, which is an unexplored axis for further engineering cell-specific responses. Indeed, endosomal IL-2Rα affinity is predicted to be *more* critical to T~reg~ specificity than binding on the surface, which agrees with the distinct temporal profiles of ligand response between cell types on the time-scale of trafficking ([@Fig:mutFac]C & K).

<!-- building on the work here to allude to next part of the project: (cell-cell variability, ligand clearance rate, mutant ligands, ...).-->

Models incorporating the full panel of responding cell populations will enable further refinement of these engineered ligands [@Leon_model]. Both IL-2 and IL-15 have extremely short half-lives *in vivo*, in part due to endocytosis mediated clearance [@Konrad2009; @Bernett1595]. Including endocytic trafficking of ligand will enable future work modeling ligand clearance *in vitro* and *in vivo*. Changes in receptor binding may therefore be selected based on both optimized selectivity and pharmacokinetic properties. While cell types were defined here by their average receptor expression, cell-to-cell variability within these populations leads to variation in stimuli response [@Cotarira17]. Incorporating single cell variation will provide a more complete picture of population response, and may help to further refine cell type selectivity.

<!-- Last paragraph can be general on how we can apply methods discussed here to other families of receptors.-->

Receptor families with many receptors and ligands are often made up of a dense web of connections, making the role of individual components non-intuitive [@Antebi_BMP; @Eubeleneaat1178]. Interconnected, cross-reactive components may have evolved as a tradeoff between transmitting ligand-mediated information and expanding the repertoire of cell-surface proteins [@KOMOROWSKI201976]. The methods detailed in this paper can be applied to many signaling systems characterized by pleiotropy and high-dimensionality. The combination of dynamical, mechanistic models and statistical exploration methods is particularly powerful to provide actionable directions for how to optimize therapeutic response. Detailed biophysical and structural characterization, animal disease models, and evidence from human genetic studies make this engineering possible for therapeutically targeting other other complex signaling pathways including FcγR, Wnt, Hedgehog, Notch, and BMP/TGFβ [@FcgR; @Eubeleneaat1178; @Li543; @ANTEBI201716; @Antebi_BMP].
