# Methods

All analysis was implemented in Python, and can be found at <https://github.com/meyer-lab/type-I-ckine-model>, release 1.0.

## Model

### Base model

Cytokine (IL-2, -4, -7, -9, -15, & -21) binding to receptors was modeled using ordinary differential equations (ODEs). IL-2 and -15 each had two private receptors, one being a signaling-deficient α-chain (IL-2Rα & -15Rα) and the other being signaling-competent IL-2Rβ. The other four cytokines each had one signaling-competent private receptor (IL-7Rα, -9R, -4Rα, & -21Rα). JAK-STAT signaling is initiated when JAK-binding motifs are brought together. JAK binding sites are found on the intracellular regions of the γ~c~, IL-2Rβ, IL-4Rα, IL-7Rα, IL-9R, and IL-21Rα receptors; therefore all complexes which contained two signaling-competent receptors were deemed to be active species. Ligands were assumed to first bind a private receptor and then can dimerize with other private receptors or γ~c~ thereafter. Direct binding of ligand to γ~c~ was not included due to its very weak or absent binding [@Voss2428].

In addition to binding interactions, our model incorporated receptor-ligand trafficking. Receptor synthesis was assumed to occur at a constant rate. The endocytosis rate was defined separately for active (k~endo,a~) and inactive (k~endo~) receptors. f~sort~ fraction of species in the endosome were ultimately trafficked to the lysosome, and active species in the endosome had a sorting fraction of 1.0. All endosomal species not sent to lysosomes were recycled back to the cell surface. The lysosomal degradation and recycling rate constants were defined as k~deg~ and k~rec~, respectively. We assumed no autocrine ligand was produced by the cells. We assumed an endosomal volume of 10 fL and endosomal surface area half that of the plasma membrane [@MEYER201525]. All binding events were assumed to occur in the endosome with 5-fold greater disassociation rate due to its acidic pH [@Fallon2000].

Free receptors and complexes were measured in units of number per cell and soluble ligands were measured in units of concentration (nM). Due to these unit choices for our species, the rate constants for ligand binding to a free receptors had units of nM^-1^ min^-1^, rate constants for the forward dimerization of free receptor to complex had units of cell min^-1^ number^-1^. Dissociation events had units of min^-1^. All ligand-receptor binding processes had an assumed forward rate (k~bnd~) of 10^7^ M^-1^ sec^-1^. All forward dimerization reaction rates were assumed to be identical, represented by k~fwd~. Reverse reaction rates were unique. Experimentally-derived affinities of 1.0 [@Gonnordeaal1253], 59 [@Walsh_IL7_2012], 0.1 [@Renauld5690], and 0.07 nM [@Gonnordeaal1253] were used for IL-4, -7, -9, and -21 binding to their cognate private receptors, respectively. IL-2 and -15 were assumed to have affinities of 10 nM and 0.065 nM for their respective α-chains [@Rickert_receptor_const; @Mortier20012006; @DUBOIS2002537], and an affinity of 144 and 438 nM for their respective β-chains [@Rickert_receptor_const]. Rates k~5~, k~10~, and k~11~ were set to their experimentally-determined dissassociation constants of 1.5, 12, and 63 nM [@Rickert_receptor_const].

Initial values were calculated by assuming steady-state in the absence of ligand. Differential equation solving was performed using the SUNDIALS solvers in C++, with a Python interface for all other code [@hindmarsh2005sundials]. Model sensitivities were calculated using the adjoint solution [@CAO2002171]. Calculating the adjoint requires the partial derivatives of the differential equations both with respect to the species and unknown parameters. Constructing these can be tedious and error-prone. Therefore, we calculated these algorithmically using forward-pass autodifferentiation implemented in Adept-2 [@hogan_robin_j_2017]. A model and sensitivities tolerance of 10^-9^ and 10^-3^, respectively, were used throughout. We used unit tests for conservation of mass, equilibrium, and detailed balance to help ensure model correctness.

### Model fitting

We used Markov chain Monte Carlo to fit the unknown parameters in our model using previously published cytokine response data [@ring_mechanistic_2012; @Gonnordeaal1253]. Experimental measurements include p-STAT activity under stimulation with varying concentrations of IL-2, -15, -4, and -7 as well as time-course measurements of surface IL-2Rβ upon IL-2 and -15 stimulation. YT-1 human NK cells were used for all data-sets involving IL-2 and IL-15. Human PBMC-derived CD4+TCR+CCR7^high^ cells were used for all IL-4 and -7 response data. All YT-1 cell experiments were performed both with the wild-type cell line, lacking IL-2Rα, and cells sorted for appreciable expression of the receptor. Data from Ring *et al* and Gonnord *et al* can be found in Figure 5 and Figure S3, respectively [@ring_mechanistic_2012; @Gonnordeaal1253]. Measurements of receptor counts at steady state in Gonnord et al. were used to solve for IL-7Rα, IL-4Rα, and γ~c~ expression rates in human PBMCs. We created functions that calculated p-STAT activity and percent of surface IL-2Rβ under various cellular conditions in order to calculate the residuals between our model predictions and experimental data.

Fitting was performed with the Python package PyMC3. All unknown rate parameters were assumed to have a lognormal distribution with a standard deviation of 0.1; the only exception to these distributions was f~sort~ which was assumed to have a beta distribution with shape parameters of α=20 and β=40. Executing this fitting process yielded likelihood distributions of each unknown parameter and sum of squared error between model prediction and experimental data at each point of experimental data. The Geweke criterion metric was used to verify fitting convergance for all versions of the model ([@Fig:supp2]) [@Geweke92].

### Tensor Generation and Factorization

To perform factorization of model predictions, we generated a three-dimensional (timepoints $\times$ cell types $\times$ ligand) data tensor of predicted ligand-induced signaling. We predicted simulating 10 cell types with IL-2, IL-7, IL-15, or a mutant IL-2Rα affinity-enriched IL-2. The receptor expression rates were set based on measured surface abundance ([@Fig:tfac]B). The ligand stimulation concentrations matched those from our experiments ([@Fig:supp5]D). Before decomposition, the tensor was variance scaled across each cell population. Tensor decomposition was performed using the Python package TensorLy [@TensorlyArxiv]. The number of components was set based on the minimum required number to reconstruct >95% of the variance in the original tensor (R2X).

## Experimental Methods

### Receptor abundance quantitation

Cryopreserved PBMCs (ATCC, PCS-800-011, lot#81115172) were thawed to room temperature and slowly diluted with 9 mL pre-warmed RPMI-1640 medium (Gibco, 11875-093) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Seradigm, 1500-500, lot#322B15). Media was removed, and cells washed once more with 10 mL warm RPMI-1640 + 10% FBS. Cells were brought to $1.5\times10^{6}$ cells/mL, distributed at 250,000 cells per well in a 96-well V-bottom plate, and allowed to recover 2 hours at 37℃ in an incubator at 5% CO2. Cells were then washed twice with PBS + 0.1% BSA (PBSA, Gibco, 15260-037, Lot#2000843) then suspended in 50 µL PBSA + 10% FBS for 10 min on ice to reduce background binding to IgG.

Antibodies were diluted in PBSA + 10% FBS and cells were stained for 1 hr at 4℃ in darkness with a gating panel (Panel 1, Panel 2, Panel 3, or Panel 4) and one anti-receptor antibody, or an equal concentration of matched isotype/fluorochrome control antibody. Stain for CD25 was included in Panel 1 when CD122, CD132, CD127, or CD215 was being measured (CD25 is used to separate T~reg~s from other CD4+ T cells).

Compensation beads (Simply Cellular Compensation Standard, Bangs Labs, 550, lot#12970) and quantitation standards (Quantum Simply Cellular anti-Mouse IgG or anti-Rat IgG, Bangs Labs, 815, Lot#13895, 817, Lot#13294) were prepared for compensation and standard curve. One well was prepared for each fluorophore with 2 µL antibody in 50 µL PBSA and the corresponding beads. Bead standards were incubated for 1 hr at room temperature in the dark.

Both beads and cells were washed twice with PBSA. Cells were suspended in 120 µL per well PBSA, and beads to 50 µL, and analyzed using an IntelliCyt iQue Screener PLUS with VBR configuration (Sartorius) with a sip time of 35 and 30 secs for cells and beads, respectively. Antibody number was calculated from fluorescence intensity by subtracting isotype control values from matched receptor stains and calibrated using the two lowest binding quantitation standards. T~reg~ cells could not be gated in the absence of CD25, so CD4+ T cells were used as the isotype control to measure CD25 in T~reg~ populations. Cells were gated as shown in [@Fig:gating]. Measurements were performed using four independent staining procedures over two days. Separately, the analysis was performed with anti-receptor antibodies at 3x normal concentration to verify that receptor binding was saturated. Replicates were summarized by geometric mean.

### pSTAT5 Measurement of IL-2 and -15 Signaling in PBMCs

Human PBMCs were thawed, distributed across a 96-well plate, and allowed to recover as described above. IL-2 (R&D Systems, 202-IL-010) or IL-15 (R&D Systems, 247-ILB-025) were diluted in RPMI-1640 without FBS and added to the indicated concentrations. To measure pSTAT5, media was removed, and cells fixed in 100 µL of 10% formalin (Fisher Scientific, SF100-4) for 15 mins at room temperature. Formalin was removed, cells were placed on ice, and cells were gently suspended in 50 µL of cold methanol (-30℃). Cells were stored overnight at -30℃. Cells were then washed twice with PBSA, split into two identical plates, and stained 1 hr at room temperature in darkness using antibody panels 4 and 5 with 50 µL per well. Cells were suspended in 100 µL PBSA per well, and beads to 50 µL, and analyzed on an IntelliCyt iQue Screener PLUS with VBR configuration (Sartorius) using a sip time of 35 seconds and beads 30 seconds. Compensation was performed as above. Populations were gated as shown in [@Fig:gating], and the median pSTAT5 level extracted for each population in each well.
